---
layout: post
author: 'Wang Chen'
title: "LWN 文章翻译 448499 - The platform device API"
# tagline: " 子标题，如果存在的话 "
# album: " 所属文章系列/专辑，如果有的话"
# group: " 默认为 original，也可选 translation, news, resume or jobs, 详见 _data/groups.yml"
permalink: /lwn-448499/
description: "LWN 文章翻译 448499"
category:
  - category1
  - category2
tags:
  - tag1
  - tag2
---

> By Unicornx of [TinyLab.org][1]
> 2017-10-10 05:26:32


# Platform 设备 API

> By Jonathan Corbet  
> June 21, 2011  

> In the very early days, Linux users often had to tell the kernel where specific 
> devices were to be found before their systems would work. In the absence of this 
> information, the driver could not know which I/O ports and interrupt line(s) the 
> device was configured to use. Happily, we now live in the days of busses like PCI 
> which have discoverability built into them; any device sitting on a PCI bus can 
> tell the system what sort of device it is and where its resources are. So the 
> kernel can, at boot time, enumerate the devices available and everything Just Works.

> Alas, life is not so simple; there are plenty of devices which are still not 
> discoverable by the CPU. In the embedded and system-on-chip world, non-discoverable 
> devices are, if anything, increasing in number. So the kernel still needs to 
> provide ways to be told about the hardware that is actually present. "Platform devices" 
> have long been used in this role in the kernel. This article will describe the 
> interface for platform devices; it is meant as needed background material for  
> [a following article](https://lwn.net/Articles/448502/) on integration with device trees.

> ## Platform drivers

> A platform device is represented by `struct platform_device`, which, like the rest 
> of the relevant declarations, can be found in `<linux/platform_device.h>`. These 
> devices are deemed to be connected to a virtual "platform bus"; drivers of platform 
> devices must thus register themselves as such with the platform bus code. This 
> registration is done by way of a platform_driver structure:

	struct platform_driver {
		int (*probe)(struct platform_device *);
		int (*remove)(struct platform_device *);
		void (*shutdown)(struct platform_device *);
		int (*suspend)(struct platform_device *, pm_message_t state);
		int (*resume)(struct platform_device *);
		struct device_driver driver;
		const struct platform_device_id *id_table;
	};

> At a minimum, the `probe()` and `remove()` callbacks must be supplied; the other 
> callbacks have to do with power management and should be provided if they are relevant.

> The other thing the driver must provide is a way for the bus code to bind actual 
> devices to the driver; there are two mechanisms which can be used for that purpose. 
> The first is the `id_table` argument; the relevant structure is:

	struct platform_device_id {
		char name[PLATFORM_NAME_SIZE];
		kernel_ulong_t driver_data;
	};

> If an ID table is present, the platform bus code will scan through it every time 
> it has to find a driver for a new platform device. If the device's name matches 
> the name in an ID table entry, the device will be given to the driver for management; 
> a pointer to the matching ID table entry will be made available to the driver as well. 
> As it happens, though, most platform drivers do not provide an ID table at all; 
> they simply provide a name for the driver itself in the `driver` field. As an example, 
> the i2c-gpio driver turns two GPIO lines into an i2c bus; it sets itself up as a 
> platform device with:


	static struct platform_driver i2c_gpio_driver = {
		.driver		= {
			.name	= "i2c-gpio",
			.owner	= THIS_MODULE,
		},
		.probe		= i2c_gpio_probe,
		.remove		= __devexit_p(i2c_gpio_remove),
	};

> With this setup, any device identifying itself as "i2c-gpio" will be bound to 
> this driver; no ID table is needed.

> Platform drivers make themselves known to the kernel with:

    int platform_driver_register(struct platform_driver *driver);

> As soon as this call succeeds, the driver's probe() function can be called with 
> new devices. That function gets as an argument a platform_device pointer describing 
> the device to be instantiated:

	struct platform_device {
		const char	*name;
		int		id;
		struct device	dev;
		u32		num_resources;
		struct resource	*resource;
		const struct platform_device_id	*id_entry;
		/* Others omitted */
	};

> The `dev` structure can be used in contexts where it is needed - the DMA mapping API, 
> for example. If the device was matched using an ID table entry, `id_entry` will point 
> to the specific entry matched. The `resource` array can be used to learn where various 
> resources, including memory-mapped I/O registers and interrupt lines, can be found. 
> There are a number of helper functions for getting data out of the resource array; 
> these include:

	struct resource *platform_get_resource(struct platform_device *pdev, 
						   unsigned int type, unsigned int n);
	struct resource *platform_get_resource_byname(struct platform_device *pdev,
						   unsigned int type, const char *name);
	int platform_get_irq(struct platform_device *pdev, unsigned int n);

> The "n" parameter says which resource of that type is desired, with zero indicating 
> the first one. Thus, for example, a driver could find its second MMIO region with:

	r = platform_get_resource(pdev, IORESOURCE_MEM, 1);

> Assuming the `probe()` function finds the information it needs, it should verify 
> the device's existence to the extent possible, register the "real" devices 
> associated with the platform device, and return zero.

> ## Platform devices

> So now we have a driver for a platform device, but no actual devices yet. As was 
> noted at the beginning, platform devices are inherently not discoverable, so there 
> must be another way to tell the kernel about their existence. That is typically 
> done with the creation of a static platform_device structure providing, at a minimum, 
> a name which is used to find the associated driver. So, for example, a simple (fictional) 
> device might be set up this way:

	static struct resource foomatic_resources[] = {
		{
			.start	= 0x10000000,
			.end	= 0x10001000,
			.flags	= IORESOURCE_MEM,
			.name	= "io-memory"
		},
		{
			.start	= 20,
			.end	= 20,
			.flags	= IORESOURCE_IRQ,
			.name	= "irq",
		}
	};
	
	static struct platform_device my_foomatic = {
		.name 		= "foomatic",
		.resource	= foomatic_resources,
		.num_resources	= ARRAY_SIZE(foomatic_resources),
	};

> These declarations describe a "foomatic" device with a one-page MMIO region 
> starting at 0x10000000 and using IRQ 20. The device is made known to the system with:


	int platform_device_register(struct platform_device *pdev);

> Once both a platform device and an associated driver have been registered, the 
> driver's `probe()` function will be called and the device will be instantiated. 
> Registration of device and driver are usually done in different places and can 
> happen in either order. A call to `platform_device_unregister()` can be used to 
> remove a platform device.

> ## Platform data

> The above information is adequate to instantiate a simple platform device, but 
> many devices are more complex than that. Even the simple i2c-gpio driver described 
> above needs two additional pieces of information: the numbers of the GPIO lines 
> to be used as i2c clock and data lines. The mechanism used to pass this information 
> is called "platform data"; in short, one defines a structure containing the specific 
> information needed and passes it in the platform device's `dev.platform_data` field.

> With the i2c-gpio example, a full configuration looks like this:

	#include <linux/i2c-gpio.h>
	
	static struct i2c_gpio_platform_data my_i2c_plat_data = {
		.scl_pin	= 100,
		.sda_pin	= 101,
	};
	
	static struct platform_device my_gpio_i2c = {
		.name		= "i2c-gpio",
		.id		= 0,
		.dev = {
			.platform_data = &my_i2c_plat_data,
		}
	};

> When the driver's `probe()` function is called, it can fetch the `platform_data` 
> pointer and use it to obtain the rest of the information it needs.

> Not everybody in the kernel community is enamored with platform devices; they 
> seem like a bit of a hack used to encode information about specific hardware 
> platforms into the kernel. Additionally, the platform data mechanism lacks any 
> sort of type checking; drivers must simply assume that they have been passed a 
> structure of the expected type. Even so, platform devices are heavily used, and 
> that's unlikely to change, though the means by which they are created and discovered 
> is changing. The way of the future appears to be device trees, which will be 
> described in the following article.