---
layout: post
author: 'Wang Chen'
title: "LWN 文章翻译 448502 - Platform devices and device trees"
# tagline: " 子标题，如果存在的话 "
# album: " 所属文章系列/专辑，如果有的话"
# group: " 默认为 original，也可选 translation, news, resume or jobs, 详见 _data/groups.yml"
permalink: /lwn-448502/
description: "LWN 文章翻译 448502"
category:
  - category1
  - category2
tags:
  - tag1
  - tag2
---

> By Unicornx of [TinyLab.org][1]
> 2017-10-10 05:26:32


> # Platform devices and device trees

# Platform 设备和设备树

> By Jonathan Corbet  
> June 21, 2011  

> The [first part](https://lwn.net/Articles/448499/) of this pair of articles described the kernel's mechanism for 
> dealing with non-discoverable devices: platform devices. The platform device 
> scheme has a long history and is heavily used, but it has some disadvantages, 
> the biggest of which is the need to instantiate these devices in code. There are 
> alternatives coming into play, though; this article will describe how platform 
> devices interact with the device tree mechanism.

> The current platform device mechanism is relatively easy to use for a developer 
> trying to bring up Linux on a new system. It's just a matter of creating the 
> descriptions for the devices present on that system and registering all of the 
> devices at boot time. Unfortunately, this approach leads to the proliferation 
> of "board files," each of which describes a single type of computer. Kernels are 
> typically built around a single board file and cannot boot on any other type of 
> system. Board files sort of worked when there were relatively small numbers of 
> embedded system types to deal with. Now Linux-based embedded systems are everywhere, 
> architectures which have typically depended on board files (ARM, in particular) 
> are finding their way into more types of systems, and the whole scheme looks 
> poised to collapse under its own weight.

> The hoped-for solution to this problem goes by the term "device trees"; in essence, 
> a device tree is a textual description of a specific system's hardware configuration. 
> The device tree is passed to the kernel at boot time; the kernel then reads through 
> it to learn about what kind of system it is actually running on. With luck, device 
> trees will abstract the differences between systems into boot-time data and allow 
> generic kernels to run on a much wider variety of hardware.

> [This article](http://devicetree.org/Device_Tree_Usage) is a good introduction to the device tree format and how it can be 
> used to describe real-world systems; it is recommended reading for anybody interested 
> in the subject.

> It is possible for platform devices to work on a device-tree-enabled system with 
> no extra work at all, especially once [Grant Likely's improvements](https://lwn.net/Articles/448677/) are merged. If 
> the device tree includes a platform device (where such devices, in the device tree 
> context, are those which are direct children of the root or are attached to a 
> "simple bus"), that device will be instantiated and matched against a driver. The 
> memory-mapped I/O and interrupt resources will be marshalled from the device tree 
> description and made available to the device's probe() function in the usual way. 
> The driver need not know that the device was instantiated out of a device tree rather 
> than from a hard-coded platform device definition.

> Life is not always quite that simple, though. Device names appearing in the device 
> tree (in the "compatible" property) tend to take a standardized form which does 
> not necessarily match the name given to the driver in the Linux kernel; among other 
> things, device trees really are meant to work with more than one operating system. 
> So it may be desirable to attach specific names to a platform device for use with 
> device trees. The kernel provides an of_device_id structure which can be used for 
> this purpose:

	static const struct of_device_id my_of_ids[] = {
		{ .compatible = "long,funky-device-tree-name" },
		{ }
	};

> When the platform driver is declared, it stores a pointer to this table in the 
> driver substructure:

	static struct platform_driver my_driver = {
		/* ... */
		.driver	= {
			.name = "my-driver",
			.of_match_table = my_of_ids
		}
	};

> The driver can also declare the ID table as a device table to enable autoloading 
> of the module as the device tree is instantiated:

	MODULE_DEVICE_TABLE(of, my_of_ids);

> The one other thing capable of complicating the situation is platform data. 
> Needless to say, the device tree code is unaware of the specific structure used 
> by a given driver for its platform data, so it will be unable to provide that 
> information in that form. On the other hand, the device tree mechanism is equipped 
> to allow the passing of just about any information that the driver may need to know. 
> Making use of that information will require the driver to become a bit more aware 
> of the device tree subsystem, though.

> Drivers expecting platform data should check the dev.platform_data pointer in the 
> usual way. If there is a non-null value there, the driver has been instantiated 
> in the traditional way and device tree does not enter into the picture; the platform 
> data should be used in the usual way. If, however, the driver has been instantiated 
> from the device tree code, the platform_data pointer will be null, indicating that 
> the information must be acquired from the device tree directly.

> In this case, the driver will find a device_node pointer in the platform devices 
> `dev.of_node` field. The various device tree access functions (`of_get_property()`, 
> primarily) can then be used to extract the needed information from the device tree. 
> After that, it's business as usual.

> In summary: making platform drivers work with device trees is a relatively 
> straightforward task. It is mostly a matter of getting the right names in place 
> so that the binding between a device tree node and the driver can be made, with 
> a bit of additional work required in cases where platform data is in use. The 
> nice result is that the static platform_device declarations can go away, along 
> with the board files that contain them. That should, eventually, allow the removal 
> of a bunch of boilerplate code from the kernel while simultaneously making the 
> kernel more flexible.
