---
layout: weekly
author: '呀呀呀'
title: 'RISC-V Linux 内核及周边技术动态第 53 期'
draft: false
group: 'news'
album: 'RISC-V Linux'
license: 'cc-by-nc-nd-4.0'
permalink: /rvlwn-53/
description: 'RISC-V Linux 内核及周边技术动态第 53 期'
category:
  - 开源项目
  - RISC-V
tags:
  - Linux
  - RISC-V
---

> 时间：20230709<br/>
> 编辑：晓依<br/>
> 仓库：[RISC-V Linux 内核技术调研活动](https://gitee.com/tinylab/riscv-linux)<br/>
> 赞助：PLCT Lab, ISCAS

## 内核动态

### RISC-V 架构支持

**[v3: RISC-V: archrandom support](http://lore.kernel.org/linux-riscv/20230709115549.2666557-1-sameo@rivosinc.com/)**

> This patchset adds support for the archrandom API to the RISC-V
> architecture.
>
> The ratified crypto scalar extensions provide entropy bits via the seed
> CSR, as exposed by the Zkr extension.
>

**[v1: riscv: support PREEMPT_DYNAMIC with static keys](http://lore.kernel.org/linux-riscv/20230709101653.720-1-jszhang@kernel.org/)**

> Currently, each architecture can support PREEMPT_DYNAMIC through
> either static calls or static keys. To support PREEMPT_DYNAMIC on
> riscv, we face three choices:
>
> 1. only add static calls support to riscv
> As Mark pointed out in commit 99cf983cc8bc ("sched/preempt: Add
> PREEMPT_DYNAMIC using static keys"), static keys "...should have
> slightly lower overhead than non-inline static calls, as this
> effectively inlines each trampoline into the start of its callee. This
> may avoid redundant work, and may integrate better with CFI schemes."
> So even we add static calls(without inline static calls) to riscv,
> static keys is still a better choice.
>
> 2. add static calls and inline static calls to riscv
> Per my understanding, inline static calls requires objtool support
> which is not easy.
>

**[v4: RISC-V: mm: Make SV48 the default address space](http://lore.kernel.org/linux-riscv/20230708011156.2697409-1-charlie@rivosinc.com/)**

> Make sv48 the default address space for mmap as some applications
> currently depend on this assumption. Also enable users to select
> desired address space using a non-zero hint address to mmap. Previous
> kernel changes caused Java and other applications to be broken on sv57
> which this patch fixes.
>

**[v2: module: Ignore RISC-V mapping symbols too](http://lore.kernel.org/linux-riscv/20230707160051.2305-2-palmer@rivosinc.com/)**

> RISC-V has an extended form of mapping symbols that we use to encode
> the ISA when it changes in the middle of an ELF.  This trips up modpost
> as a build failure, I haven't yet verified it yet but I believe the
> kallsyms difference should result in stacks looking sane again.
>

**[GIT PULL: RISC-V Patches for the 6.5 Merge Window, Part 2](http://lore.kernel.org/linux-riscv/mhng-4bd23a4e-dd7c-4f62-90c8-804c137c2621@palmer-ri-x1c9/)**

> merged tag 'riscv-for-linus-6.5-mw1'
> The following changes since commit 533925cb760431cb496a8c965cfd765a1a21d37e:
>
>   Merge tag 'riscv-for-linus-6.5-mw1' of git://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/riscv/linux (2023-06-30 09:37:26 -0700)
>
> are available in the Git repository at:
>
>   git://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/riscv/linux.git tags/riscv-for-linus-6.5-mw2
>

**[v6: tools/nolibc: add a new syscall helper](http://lore.kernel.org/linux-riscv/cover.1688739492.git.falcon@tinylab.org/)**

> Here is the v6 of the __sysret series [1], applies your suggestions.
> additionally, the sbrk() also uses the __sysret helper.
>

**[v1: RISC-V: Support querying vendor extensions](http://lore.kernel.org/linux-riscv/20230705-thead_vendor_extensions-v1-0-ad6915349c4d@rivosinc.com/)**

> Introduce extensible method of querying vendor extensions. Keys above
> 1UL<<63 passed into the riscv_hwprobe syscall are reserved for vendor
> extensions. The appropriate vendor is resolved using the discovered
> mvendorid. Vendor specific code is then entered which determines how to
> respond to the input hwprobe key.
>

**[v2: RISC-V: Show accurate per-hart isa in /proc/cpuinfo](http://lore.kernel.org/linux-riscv/20230705172931.1099183-1-evan@rivosinc.com/)**

> In /proc/cpuinfo, most of the information we show for each processor is
> specific to that hart: marchid, mvendorid, mimpid, processor, hart,
> compatible, and the mmu size. But the ISA string gets filtered through a
> lowest common denominator mask, so that if one CPU is missing an ISA
> extension, no CPUs will show it.
>

**[v3: Obtain SMBIOS and ACPI entry from FFI](http://lore.kernel.org/linux-riscv/20230705114251.661-1-cuiyunhui@bytedance.com/)**

> Here's version 3 of patch series.
>

**[v1: RISC-V: KVM: provide UAPI for host SATP mode](http://lore.kernel.org/linux-riscv/20230705091535.237765-1-dbarboza@ventanamicro.com/)**

> KVM userspaces need to be aware of the host SATP to allow them to
> advertise it back to the guest OS.
>
> Since this information is used to build the guest FDT we can't wait for
> the SATP reg to be readable. We just need to read the SATP mode, thus
> we can use the existing 'satp_mode' global that represents the SATP reg
> with MODE set and both ASID and PPN cleared. E.g. for a 32 bit host
> running with sv32 satp_mode is 0x80000000, for a 64 bit host running
> sv57 satp_mode is 0xa000000000000000, and so on.
>

**[v7: -next: support allocating crashkernel above 4G explicitly on riscv](http://lore.kernel.org/linux-riscv/20230704212327.1687310-1-chenjiahao16@huawei.com/)**

> On riscv, the current crash kernel allocation logic is trying to
> allocate within 32bit addressible memory region by default, if
> failed, try to allocate without 4G restriction.
>
> In need of saving DMA zone memory while allocating a relatively large
> crash kernel region, allocating the reserved memory top down in
> high memory, without overlapping the DMA zone, is a mature solution.
> Hence this patchset introduces the parameter option crashkernel=X,[high,low].
>

### 异步 IO

**[v1: io_uring: A new function has been defined to make get/put exist in pairs](http://lore.kernel.org/io-uring/20230706093208.6072-1-luhongfei@vivo.com/)**

> A new function called io_put_task_refs has been defined for pairing
> with io_get_task_refs.
>
> In io_submit_sqes(), when req is not fully sent(i.e. left != 0), it is
> necessary to call the io_put_task_refs() to recover the current process's
> cached_refs and pair it with the io_get_task_refs(), which is easy to
> understand and looks more regular.
>

## 周边技术动态

### Qemu

**[v3: target/riscv: improve code accuracy and](http://lore.kernel.org/qemu-devel/20230708091055.38505-1-reaperlu@hust.edu.cn/)**

> I'm so sorry. As a newcomer, I'm not familiar with the patch mechanism. I mistakenly added the reviewer's "Reviewed-by" line into the wrong commit, So I have resent this patchset
>

**[v1: target/riscv KVM_RISCV_SET_TIMER macro is not configured correctly](http://lore.kernel.org/qemu-devel/20230707032306.4606-1-gaoshanliukou@163.com/)**

> Should set/get riscv all reg timer,i.e, time/compare/frequency/state.
>

**[v2: riscv: Generate devicetree only after machine initialization is complete](http://lore.kernel.org/qemu-devel/20230706035937.1870483-1-linux@roeck-us.net/)**

> If the devicetree is created before machine initialization is complete,
> it misses dynamic devices. Specifically, the tpm device is not added
> to the devicetree file and is therefore not instantiated in Linux.
> Load/create devicetree in virt_machine_done() to solve the problem.
>

**[v1: riscv: add config for asid size](http://lore.kernel.org/qemu-devel/20230705105838.68806-1-ben.dooks@codethink.co.uk/)**

> Add a config to the cpu state to control the size of the ASID area
> in the SATP CSR to enable testing with smaller than the default (which
> is currently maximum for both rv32 and rv64). It also adds the ability
> to stop the ASID feature by using 0 to disable it.
>

### U-Boot

**[v2: riscv: Initial support for Lichee PI 4A board](http://lore.kernel.org/u-boot/20230708112435.23583-1-dlan@gentoo.org/)**

> Sipeed's Lichee PI 4A board is based on T-HEAD's TH1520 SoC which consists of
> quad core XuanTie C910 CPU, plus one C906 CPU and one E902 CPU.
>
> In this series, we add a basic device tree, including UART CPU, PLIC, make it
> capable of running into a serial console.
>
> Please note that, we rely on pre shipped vendor u-boot which run in M-Mode to
> chain load this mainline u-boot either via eMMC storage or from tftp, thus the
> pinctrl and clock setting are not implemented in this series, which certainly
> can be improved later accordingly.
>

**[v1: riscv: (visionfive2:) device tree binding for riscv_timer](http://lore.kernel.org/u-boot/20230707135333.GA30112@lst.de/)**

> following the existing device tree binding[1], here is a draft to use it
> in drivers/timer/riscv_timer.c. This would also fix the regression we see
> with commit 55171aedda8 ("dm: Emit the arch_cpu_init_dm() even only
> before relocation"), at least on the VisionFive2, as sketched out below.
> The device tree addition suits the Linux kernel dirver
>

**[v1: u-boot-riscv/riscv-for-next](http://lore.kernel.org/u-boot/ZKabX3HI7USoCEEt@ubuntu01/)**

> The following changes since commit e80f4079b3a3db0961b73fa7a96e6c90242d8d25:
>
>   Merge tag 'v2023.07-rc6' into next (2023-07-05 11:28:55 -0400)
>
> are available in the Git repository at:
>
>   https://source.denx.de/u-boot/custodians/u-boot-riscv.git riscv-for-next
>

